
So my name is Isabel Guerrero.
Until a couple of months ago, I was a vice president
at the World Bank.
I covered South Asia.
I've been working for 31 years in the World Bank,
and now I am at a process of transition
in between that and whatever is emerging.
I'm an economist by training, and I'm also
a psychoanalyst by training.
So what we're curious about is what started you on the journey
to where you are now?
And maybe if you could share a particular story or a moment
where you first became aware of what you really wanted to do.
Yeah.
So when I was 12 or 13 years old,
my family moved from Chile to Peru.
Chile's relatively rich compared to the rest of Latin America
and also very unique culture.
There were not a lot of indigenous people.
It was more Spanish.
And then moved to Peru, which is a very multicultural place.
And the first memory that I have,
which actually I always go back to-- this
is where my golden thread starts--
is seeing this indigenous woman sitting on the pavement.
And she's selling little herbs.
And I remember looking at her and thinking oh, my god, she's
so poor.
But also she's so rich.
She had this beautiful thing over her shoulders and a hat,
and her dress was just beautiful.
So I think it wasn't that conscious,
but when I go back, that's the moment when I thought
this is what I want to dedicate my life to,
which is to both improve her life
but also celebrate her beauty.
So that is the moment for me.
And what happened next?
So then as I studied, I realized that economics was probably
the best way to work on poverty.
And I studied in Peru.
In the Catholic University was a much more left wing training.
And then I'm moved for my master's
to the London School of Economics, which
was very neoclassical.
And I learned economics in one of the best schools
in the world.
I had to relearn a lot, and I came out of there at around 25,
and joined the World Bank, the Young Professionals program.
And for many years, for the first 10 or 15 years,
I was what I call a policy wonk.
I really believed in policy economics;
it's a very beautiful tool in that
it allows you to approach a very complex reality
and simplify it.
And so I really believed that if you understood incentives
and the market and the market failure,
you would be able to really change the world.
So I spent many years working on structural adjustment programs,
first in the Philippines when Marcos was on his way out.
I did the first poverty report.
I focused on macroeconomics and on poverty and inequality.
That was always my focus.
Then I worked on Burma, worked on Morrocco,
on the former Soviet Union when it was collapsing.
And it was all very well until the East Asia crisis came.
And I think not only me, but a lot of economists realized
that the simple way of approaching the world
was not really cutting it in that we had left out
lots of things that are really important.
Institutions, for one.
Second, in the former Soviet Union.
I remember when we were talking to government officials,
they didn't even know what a bank was.
Their concept of a bank was very different.
So we started to say, no, just let the private sector
take care of it.
Just privatize, then let the private sector--
we didn't even think about governance.
So for me that was a huge lesson.
Because we were in such a simplistic way
approaching a very complex problem
that a lot of very negative results came out of that.
Mafias were formed.
Privatization was only for a few.
This incredible, unequal distribution came about.
So I think for me that was a moment where I thought,
so how do I change the world now?
This is not the magic bullet.
And that's where my search continued.
So from that question, then what did you begin to explore?
So then I began to explore more the human being
and the leadership story.
So I began to train as a psychoanalyst.
I trained for 10 years.
In the beginning, it was very much
working with people who were in poverty.
And I wanted to understand how, from the individual
perspective, this poverty problem could be understood.
And it was a beautiful experience,
because if you really work-- this was psychoanalysis, which
is on a couch-- five days a week.
So if you really work with people
who are committed to change, you can see huge transformation.
So the first one, for example, was a Colombian guy
who had been a street child in Colombia, very poor, very
violent background.
And then we started to work, we worked for nine years.
And he started-- he came because he wanted to commit suicide.
And then little by-- because he said
I don't want to live in a world which is so violent
and I don't want to bring a child
to the world which is so violent.
And little by little the work continued,
and the last time I heard from him,
he called me from the hospital and he
said my child has just been born.
That was the last time we met.
So that personal transformation was very powerful,
both with the patients that I was working, but also my own.
Because to train as a psychoanalyst,
you have to go through your own analysis.
And so I could see how if I changed myself,
I could actually start to change the world around me.
And that coincided with my first management job
where I had to bring in teams.
And I started very much in the top down approach,
get efficiency, get productivity mode.
And then realizing that that was not really bringing
about the transformation that I thought was possible.
And that's when I started to really invest
in learning about leadership and how
I had to change in order to bring
about the innovation, the transformation outside
that our clients were asking of us.
And then I got involved in a lot of organizational change
inside the World Bank.
How could we become better at the task
of poverty alleviation, which is the central mission
of the World Bank?
By changing the organization, by removing as many obstacles
as possible for people who were in the front
line to do their job, rather than to spend a lot of time
in administration, in all these bureaucratic requirements
that this very top down system was asking of staff.
So it's interesting because you started
with a golden thread, which was so poor and so rich
at the same time.
Went to this big, macro-level looking at economics, and then
the personal transformation.
So if you look back on that journey,
what's really worked for you?
Constant exploration.
I think questioning myself.
It's been a constant change, which
is quite demanding on people around me.
I always think about my husband.
You know, it must be very demanding for somebody.
I'm constantly searching.
I'm constantly having a coach.
I've had a coach for years and years.

I'm constantly in transition, so I'm pushing myself out
of my comfort zone.
And so I think I am a much richer person,
but it's also quite an intense voyage.
So sometimes my teams, I've seen--
I worked with a group of coaches in my last job for five years.
So everybody in my management team
had a coach, including myself.
And then I worked with a coach as a collective
so that we could together-- both they gave me feedback.
But I also said look, this is where we're going next.
Please help me with this in your own individual coaching.
And they told me there was a lot of pride in working in the team
that I was.
Everybody wanted to come.
It was seen as the best team.
But also there was a lot of demands
that I was implicitly putting on people
that they had to grow as much as I felt I had to.
And not everybody is up for that.
So what I'm trying to say that it's not all great.
There's a whole shadow to it that I've
had to really be very conscious about.
The shadow to what specifically?
Being very demanding about personal transformation
on others to develop as leaders.
Yeah.

How has you experience as an economist informed
your training as a psychoanalyst and vice versa?
So when I applied for this psychoanalytic training,
I was in interviews for a year.
Nobody could understand why I wanted
to become a psychoanalyst.
And they were like, there's no relationship between the two.
And actually I didn't know to articulate,
but I had this intuition that there was.
A now I see it in a big way.
So economics, first of all, is very
obsolete in how it thinks about behavior.
It's really psychology from the 1920s,
and it's never really been updated.
And I remember when I used to question in microeconomics,
what do you mean utility functions are independent?
What do you mean my well being doesn't at all
depend on my neighbor's wellbeing?
They would say, stop questioning.
Just study for the exam.
So I remember.
And so I always had this unease about the behavioral side
of economics.
And there's people who have been trying to change that.
But economic profession is very resilient to change.
They are not very open.
So they've never-- Amartya Sen, for example,
has this famous book on inequality.
He really questioned this idea of utility functions
being independent.
And he has a Nobel Prize, but his impact on the way
that economics is taught.
Micro, macro, you don't really feel it.
Micro is still taught based on these utility functions.
So I think, first of all, I came from that point of view
that economics had this real weakness.
And then when I studied psychoanalysis,
psychoanalysis is a very strong framework.
That's why I went into psychoanalysis rather than
into other type of psychology.
And I think it really enriched the way
that I understood the world.
Because you have the world of macro-- governments,
regulation, private sector-- and then
you have a whole world in each person.
And each person is unique.
And each person has the potential to really transform.
So the process of transformation that
happens at the individual level is
something that really helped me understand how tough it
is to transform the bigger macro.
Because it is formed of individuals.
And to change that you really need
to change from a deeper space.

I want to actually move along a little bit
to meet at the present moment.
Which, from what I understand, you've
gone into an unknown space.
And I bet that's something that a lot of people
would like to know more about.
You went from a place where you've had a wonderful career.
You've been very accomplished, and so
why step into this unknown space again,
and why and also just any insights
you can give about what it's been like for you
from a personal perspective to be going through this.
Yeah, it's been tough.
First of all because I jumped, not quite knowing why.
But I knew that that was it, that this was the time.
I was very aware that I had to go through a process
where I had to give up external signs of power.
Because even though I never believed
that being a vice president of the Bank was about me,
I knew that a lot of what I got was about the function
and not about me.
Still, I knew that I had to give up that.
And so that is an interesting process.
You step out from a place you've worked for 30 years.
It's your village.
It is your community even though it
has things that you are very happy that you're walking away
from.
But still, that is painful.
So there's a whole process of letting go, which is painful,
and I think it stops a lot of people from jumping.
Because you have to go through that.
Every time that I change countries--
and I've lived in a lot of countries-- the first six
months were really painful months.
I left the familiar.
I left my nest.
And every time, I was like, why am
I doing this if it's so painful?
And then one day I realized I'm doing it because--
and this is true for now as well-- I'm
doing it because every time that I get out of my comfort zone,
it's an opportunity to discover something really new.
So right now I'm in this space, and I love this William Bridges
book on transition.
I'm in this neutral zone.
So I'm not in the past.
I've stepped out.
I'm not in the future.
I'm in this space an in between.
So it's a space that creates a lot of anxiety,
but it's also-- I believe it's the eminent creative space.
That's where innovation happens.
That's where creativity-- that's where you really
find a completely new thing that is waiting to emerge.
And so that's some super rich space.
I have no idea exactly what I'm going
to be doing in the future, but I've been exploring things
that I love that I have never had time to explore.
I love abstract painting.
I've gone into oil painting, photography.
So I'm just touching loves that have been waiting
for me out there to have the time to go.
I've been much more present to my family.
My family's in Chile, but I've been
spending more time with them.
My husband-- it's just been more present to life.
So I'm looking forward to what's coming next.
Are there questions that have come up for you,
questions that are maybe central to this time for you right now
that have come up since you stepped
into this neutral space?
So that's the question of-- so my golden thread is clear.
I still-- that's a big question, which
is that picture was a picture of I
want to work so she can come out of poverty.
But I also wanted to celebrate her beauty.
And that's the question.
What is it about that that I haven't yet touched?
And I have a lot of judgment, we all have.
I think about design and fashion and things like that.
That's why seeing Eileen Fisher was so good for me,
because I'm very judgmental about those things.
I'm like oh, fashion.
That's a horrible world.
Well, maybe not.
You have to open yourself to that judgment.
So I don't know where it will take me,
but I know that that beauty I had left out,
and it is in my golden thread.
And I have to explore it and find where it's going to come.
Is there anything else you want to add?

No, I think life is about integrating
different parts of yourself.
And eventually finding your authentic self.
And that authentic self has a lot of dimensions.
The spiritual is one.
For me, integrating the feminine has been another.
I was a very masculine type of leader,
because that's what gave me the results
and those were my role models.
And then when I went to Mexico I think
I found the value of the feminine,
the strength of the feminine.
So I think life is a beautiful, long journey where you actually
integrate different parts.
And to become a leader and to be part of a transformation,
you have to go through an integration.
That is the leadership voyage for me.
So the personal side is very important.
You cannot be a leader of transformation if you're not
willing to-- like Gandhi said, "You have to be the change that
you want to see in the world."
I think that is-- so even though sometimes it seems difficult
and you have to step out of your comfort zone
and there is pain-- because the first reaction people have
when you have pain of leaving the familiar, the sadness
or fear-- the first reaction is well, maybe
I shouldn't be here.
And no, that's the door.
That's the door through which you
have to walk if you really want that new.
So then your advice would be to--
Don't get afraid of the pain.
Don't get afraid of the unknown.
Step out of your comfort zone so you can continue growing.
And this is a lifelong thing.
It's not just when you're younger.
It continues.
That's the beauty.
