Nipun, thank you for joining us for a moment.
So we are here with the ULab Community.
And most of us watched in the last few days your TEDx talk.
That was in 2012.
So our first question is, what has happened since?
And you look around and you're engaged
in so many projects, what's the kind of work
and the kind of development you see going on
and you participate in that inspires you most?
Well, I think one of the biggest shifts that we have seen
is a manifestation of a many-to-many network.
We talk about it as a Gandhi 3.0.
So Gandhi 1.0 was one of Gandhi in many of us.
It was one-to-many.
And then there was a 2.0 version,
which happened in India with Gandhi's successor named
Vinoba, and he walked from village to village,
and it was one of him and one of the people in the community.
So it was a one-to-one kind of a network
and now I think what we're seeing is a many-to-many kind
of a network.
And we have established this for- we
know that it works for profit.
We have seen it for protest, but we have not seen for love.
We have not seen it for compassion.
We have not seen it for generosity.
And that's the kind of field that we are cultivating,
and we have been since that TED Talk.
It's been great, yeah.
And a lot of beautiful things are coming out of that field.
One example would be this idea of a 21 day kindness challenge.
So a few of us- we actually had these interns for our summer
internship program.
And we would tell them to do this very simple thing,
and it was just a side thing.
We actually didn't even- we just thought of it as a practice.
So we told them that you go out and you do a small act
of kindness every day.
Only catch is that you do a different one every day.
And so initially the first- and at that time
it was a 30 day challenge, and so
for the month they were doing a unique act of kindness
every day.
So what happened is, in the first 10 days they would say,
oh, this is easy.
You open a door for a stranger, or you pick up someone's glove
that they've dropped, or if it's raining
you give an umbrella to somebody-
they thought of these ideas, and they did the things
that they knew how to do.
But that was in the first 10 days.
And then they had to get creative.
So all of a sudden they're thinking,
oh wait, I've already done this.
Or, I've already done a variation of this.
What's the new thing that I can do?
In that process, they started to rewire their brain.
And so what we noticed is, in the second third,
they started to get very creative.
And it unleashed a kind of capacity
in them that even they didn't know existed.
And then the most magical thing happens
in the last third, which is where, now I've
done all the things I know how to do,
so I'm kind of in the flow.
And now I have this new capacity because I've
been flexing my kindness muscles,
and then it's like, what am I going to do?
How is this going to flow out into the world?
And what inevitably would happen is that it would flow out where
people needed to be healed.
And they know themselves.
Like, we didn't say, go out and heal yourself
through generosity.
That it would naturally happen from them.
So, to give you an example, there
was one of our interns, this beautiful Vietnamese girl.
She did these awesome acts for the first 10 days- first third.
Second third, she's doing creative things,
and now she feels like she has this capacity.
Day 22 or day 23, she sends us- because every day you
do this act and then they would write to us about what
they've done and reflect on it.
And so she writes to us, and she says,
today I decided to be kind to myself.
And we said, how's that?
So it turned out that when she was
young- I think something like nine years
old- she was in the backseat, dad was driving,
and mom was in the passenger seat.
Car gets in an accident, and the mom passes away.
It was a very tragic experience, naturally, for her.
She had always stuffed it down.
And so, on this day 23, she decides
that she's going to be kind to herself
by going to her mother's funeral site for the first time alone.
And it was not something we had orchestrated.
It was not something we had planned.
It was not something- and it was just something
that came up from within her.
We started to see this kind of a pattern
repeatedly, where we were just doing a very small thing.
We were just holding space for them
to practice an act of kindness every day.
And even they thought they were just doing the small thing,
but this small thing coupled with the inner transformation
that accompanies it, coupled with a circle that
holds all of those reflections, starts to really create
an incredible capacity.
So we looked at that and we said, wow, this is amazing.
We should help other people do that.
And then we started doing it for kindness,
we started doing it for gratitude,
and thousands of people all over the world would join.
And so we said, wow, this is great,
but what's the next step?
We had something like I think 18,000 people for the gratitude
challenge.
So we said, what would be the next step?
50,000 person challenge?
That's not really our style.
It's not many-to-many.
So our thought was, what if you had small clusters of people?
You have your group at work, and what if they all
do a kindness challenge?
You have your group at MIT, and what if they all
do a kindness challenge?
I may be in a school and what if my classroom does it?
So how do you distribute and decentralize?
And so we launched a platform.
And it's been amazing for people to just create their own.
It takes all the administrative burden away, and people say,
I want to launch this kindness challenge.
You import an existing challenge- one of maybe 9 or 10
that are there, and it's increasing all the time
in terms of the themes.
And you have a feed on your community,
your online community.
And really it's powered by your inner transformation that
happens through those acts.
So I think for me, that's an interesting example of how
you apply many-to-many organizing- distributed,
decentralized- but you also honor the inner transformation
and you have this container of community that's
able to nurture and support each other.
So it's a really powerful expression.
And like that, I think we're just
trying to create more and more examples.
But I think the most powerful thing for me,
the lesson that I take away, is probably
something that's been eternal, but I think my confidence in it
grows with every year.
It was there in 2012.
It was probably there in 2010.
But in 2015 it's there with even greater gusto,
and that is that, when we change ourselves,
we can change the world.
And, in fact, if we try to change the world
without changing ourselves, it's just
going to be hollow and empty.
It's not going to have a kind of afterlife.
Its half-life is going to be very small.
But if I do it coupled with inner change,
with my whole self into it- as Gandhi said,
you must be the change you wish to see in the world.
He didn't say, go out and do the change.
He didn't say, go out and talk about the change.
He said be the change.
And I think it's because when you be the change,
it has a kind of unique ripple effect.
It will touch you in a way that nothing else will,
and that will then touch someone else in a very different way.
Versus, if it was just me trying to serve you
at the physical level, it wouldn't
have that deeper resonance.
So for me, that continues to be the big insight,
and my confidence in that grows more and more as we
experiment with so much else.

It's a wrap, right?
So this sounds very much like something
that we as a distributive community,
very decentralized around various hubs
and small groups around the world.
That's something that could be the many-to-many, right?
So that could be an infrastructure we could use?
Absolutely.
I think any setting, no matter what the scale, can
adopt these values.
And this is very consistent with all of your work, right?
This is precisely the kind of network
that I think is a paradigm shift.
But I think that we have to think and say, how do I
apply this in my setting?

At one level, at a personal level,
you do small acts of kindness, and those small acts
of kindness creates a kind of mental quiet.
And you benefit, and there's a ripple out into the world,
and that's a very beautiful thing.
At a second level, when those ripples start to get connected,
it creates these mini gift economies.
And we've all experienced this.
This is what- like in families, we experience that.
I'm not keeping track of what my dad did for me,
and what my mom did for me, and how much it all- it
would be silly.
So we all know how that works, and so we can create
these mini pods where I'm taking care of you,
you're taking care of the person in front of you,
and what goes around will come around, in a different form.
But I get the circle in return for not dealing with it
in a transactional way.
I have the circles in return.
So that's at a second level, and then if you go even more macro,
I think you start to create a gift ecology.
Where you have so many parts intertwined with each other,
and it's way more powerful than an economy
where- how do you start to say- there's
a really great example, post Hurricane Katrina,
of the oak trees.
So Hurricane Katrina came and it swept everything
up- all the houses, all the cars, all the telephone poles.
Everything's upside down, everything's
destroyed, except for this one thing- oak trees.
These oak trees have survived for centuries,
and the reason why they survived is
because they have deep roots.
But it wasn't just that they have deep roots.
It's that those deep roots were connected
to the deep roots of other oak trees,
and those other oak trees were connected to others, sometimes
for a span of over 100 miles.
So this big hurricane comes, and I'm shaken up.
I can't handle this.
So I call on my roots, and those roots are interconnected,
and everyone starts to give a little bit,
and all of a sudden I have this incredible resilience.
And I think that's sort of- at a meta
Ievel- that's gift ecology, where you start to really
have this unprecedented capacity to be
resilient to all that comes up.
Comes up to us as individual trees,
but also us as a collective union of trees.
Maybe there's a giant source of suffering
that's going to come our way, and this kind of thing
starts to really bring us together.
So the question would be, how do you go in and create?
How do you be a part of this kind of a gift ecology?
What is a small part I can do?
At one level, you can go out and be kind, practice kindness.
On a second level, connect with other people
who are doing that kindness.
If that's in the U.Lab context, do that in the U.Lab context.
At a third level, how do you then
take it out into the world?
And you can do that through so many different expressions,
no matter where you are.
There's a rickshaw driver in India
that runs his rickshaw on a gift economy basis.
He says, anyone who sits in my rickshaw,
I will not charge them.
And you'll say, well, how much do I pay?
Well, whatever you're willing to offer.
And when you look at his logs, it's
like, yeah, people end up paying roughly
what he would get if it was a transaction-based model.
And then people would say, so it's been working out,
and he says, oh, not only that.
Let me show you this other book.
In this book I ask people how they
feel sitting in my rickshaw, and it's an incredible new value
proposition that's just not measured in dollars and cents.
And so here's a rickshaw driver, not someone
like a Bill Gates who has a lot is doing it.
This guy's day-to-day kind of basis
is that's how he's surviving.
And he's able to say, I want to do something and be
a part of a gift ecology.
And so like that, there's a guy who runs a magazine in the US.
And he'd been running it for a long time,
and he says, I no longer- magazines, ads.
You're selling subscriptions.
He was tired of that.
He ran it for 15 years.
And so then he says, I want to be part of a gift ecology.
He said, I want to be that change.
And so he turned, he says, from- this
is when we met- when I told him.
I said, Richard, what you're doing
is too valuable to be sold.
So he did a double take.
Usually value is like dollars, so how
can something be too valuable to be sold?
And he's like, what do you mean?
So I said, I really feel like what you're doing
is a labor of love.
It's too valuable to be sold.
So he does a double take.
At that time he was 65 years old.
He has been doing this magazine, and it's
like a traditional magazine.
It's an amazing art magazine, Works and Conversations.
He straightens his back, and he's like, you know what?
You're right.
And he straightens his back a little bit more,
and he's like, you're right.
And he says it a third time, he goes home,
and he writes a letter to all his subscribers
offering them refunds for all that they have paid.
And he says, from today, I'm only
going to receive offerings of gratitude.

And he did this I think six or seven years ago,
and the magazine is better off than ever before.
And you ask his wife, Rue.
And it's like, how's Richard doing?
Rue will be like, I've never seen him this happy.
Now he's over 70 years old, and this guy
is just incredibly gifted.
He's a great writer, he's a great interviewer,
and he's able to really bring out
gems from these amazing social artists.
And now he's doing it on a pay-it-forward basis.
And people are so much more vested in it.
He's feeling so great about it.
He's feeling like, there's no dollar signs
in my whole magazine.
I'm not asking anyone for anything.
I'm just giving love.
One final question.
So it feels like you're living in the gift economy, not only,
but in the gift ecology.
And I think all of us know that.
We know that from our own experience.
We have tons of that experience.
But then, we live also in the transactional economy.
That works according to very different principles.
So there's this tension.
So do you have any advice?
Some of us live mainly in the transactional,
so what's your advice there.
And also, if you do a heat map globally in society,
where's the gift ecology most alive?
Where do you see it?
Is at the edges of the economic systems or
does it come from the center?
Where do you see it thriving, really?
And, in other words, if I want to move towards that,
where do I need to direct my attention?

I'll go second question first.
I think that it's actually most alive in places that are
at least materially well-off.
So if I had to teach someone philanthropy,
I would actually take them to the slums and I would say,
this guy doesn't have enough to feed himself
and yet their family has a tradition
of feeding all the birds that come on that tree outside.
And every day at 6 o'clock that tree is full of birds
because that guy's going to say, I may go hungry,
but I got to do this because this is my commitment
to generosity.
This is my commitment to my family's tradition
of generosity.
And you see examples like that and you're like, wow.
This is love.

It inspires you.
It gives you faith in humanity.
And if you ever think, oh God, everything's going down.
You're saying, no, how can everything go down,
because such people exist.
Everything that we know in the media and the top down stuff
may go down, but this spirit is very much there.
So I would say that go out, not just
to the edges of certain locations
and certain constructs.
But I would say turn the construct upside down and say,
if you want to learn about philanthropy,
go to those who have the least and you
might be surprised with their generosity
and what they can teach you.
So I would turn it down in that way.
In terms of where it's present in the world,
I think it's everywhere.
I think you see that inequality- you
see greed as a universal problem these days, all over the world.
You see inequality as a universal problem.
And I think the antidote to that is generosity.
Greed is all about taking, is accumulating.
Generosity is all about giving.
And so I think that antidote is present in all communities
everywhere.
I think it's a universal thing.
I was in Japan and I met a girl- I met a woman, young woman,
and she says, generosity has changed my life.
And I said, what do you mean?
She says, well, four years ago, everything- I
was financially bankrupt, my husband left me,
I had all these different issues, my health was gone.
And then I remembered that when you
feel like you don't have anything
is when you start to really deteriorate your spirit.
And so I said, what do I have?
She says, what are the gifts that I can offer to the world
when it seems like I have nothing,
when the conditioned mind is saying,
you are bankrupt in every way.
She realized that, man, I can give love.
Through our own work, she came to this insight
that I can give love.
And she decided, every day, to have a rice ball,
to make a small rice ball and give it to one stranger.
And she did this every single day for four years.
And I met her in the middle of this practice.
And this woman is now doing remarkable things.
She's so happy.
She's able to deliver so much value.
She runs a vegan restaurant- I think a probiotic restaurant
or something of the sort, which is radical in Japan.
And if you ask her, where's the source of your strength,
she would say, well, it's love.
It's my practice of giving that one
rice ball every, single day.
So I think it starts with that inner
and goes out, creates small communities,
and then ripples out to even circles where everyone is not
bought into the same thing.
And I think this is where your transaction
to trust- if you're rooted in a transactional paradigm,
my advice would be, go out and have some part of your life
which is no strings attached and just
notice how that makes you feel, and just notice
the ripple effect of what happens there.
We tend to think that if I give freely,
that I'll be taken advantage of, that it's not
going to work out.
But you might surprise yourself.
You may do it just because it feels right,
but actually, when you do that and it just feels right to you,
it may even feel right to the other person.
And what comes out between the two of you-
which was previously transactional
and now just is trust based- that possibility is going
to be a whole new paradigm.
So I would say create that space,
even if it's one moment, even if it's one hour of volunteering,
or it fits your whole life.
Whatever you're in position to create in your life,
just go out and have that space and experiment
with no strings attached giving, and see how it feels.
That would be my two cents.
Thank you.

Love it.
I love it.
Thank you, guys.
I just have to say, hearing your stories- it's
so inspiring to hear the stories that you share
with us, and over the last few days getting to know you,
seeing how you live these same principles,
I can feel the same type of transformation happening here,
within myself, that you're describing
in these other stories.
So I'm really grateful, and I'm sure- like everyone else-
we regret that we have to stop the conversation right now.
But thank you so much.
Yeah, absolutely.
Temporarily suspend!
That's right.
It will never stop.
And I hope it continues in our hearts.
So thank you for including me, and I look forward
to being of service.
Thank you.